Market volatility is the volatility of the stock universe over a time horizon.
Varying levels of market volatility may affect how stock selection strategies perform.
For instance, during the financial crisis originating in September 2008,
there was high market volatility in every asset class and across virtually all stocks.
If you simulate a meaner version signal during this period,
you will see that it performed very well.
Why is that?
We can't say for sure,
but we can posit that when risk is
high market participants manage that risk by trading more.
When market participants trade more,
they create temporary market impact which reverts when their liquidity demand dries up.
On the other hand, during low volatility periods you
might expect to see factors that depend on company fundamentals do well.
Again, we can say for certain why this is,
but logically one could posit that in periods of lower volatility,
idiosyncratic developments in company fundamentals
are not drowned out by market-wide high volatility.
One way to generate a signal that indicates a shift into
high market volatility is by comparing short-term and long-term volatility.
For example, one month is short-term and six month is long-term.
When short-term volatility is higher than long-term volatility,
this can be a signal that the market has shifted into a high market volatility regime.
We could typically measure a rolling standard deviation of a market
ETF such as the S&P 500 SPDR.
A way to approximate the market whoever is to take
the equal weighted average of all the stocks in the defined universe.
Then, calculate the standard deviation of
these returns over a time horizon such as one or six months.
Market volatility is a useful indicator of the state of the market over that time period.
As just described, during periods of high market volatility and
mean reversion alpha factor and maybe more relevant for predicting future returns.
Whereas during periods of low market volatility,
fundamental factors may be more relevant.